THE GOSPEL OF SAINT LUKE The Authorized Version, commonly known as
the King James Version, chapters 15 and 16.
This is Father Zeile of Detroit, December 2008.
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SAINT LUKE, CHAPTERS 15 AND 16.
Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.
And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners,
and eateth with them. And he spake this parable unto them, saying,
What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them,
doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost,
until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbors,
saying unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
more than over ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance.
Either what woman, having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece,
doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it.
And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her neighbors together,
saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost.
Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner
that repenteth. And he said, A certain man had two sons, and the younger of them said to his father,
Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto him his living.
And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far
country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. And when he had spent all,
there arose a mighty famine in that land, and he began to be in want. And he went and joined
himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine. And he would
have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat, and no man gave unto him.
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my fathers have
bred enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger. I will arise and go to my father,
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Make me as one of thy hired servants.
And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. But the father said to his servants,
Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet,
and bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it, and let us eat, and be merry. For this my son was dead,
and is alive again. He was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.
Now his elder brother was in the field, and as he came and drew nigh to the house,
he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.
And he said unto him, Thy brother is come, and thy father hath killed the fatted calf,
because he hath received him safe and sound. And he was angry, and would not go in. Therefore
came his father out, and entreated him. And he answering said to his father, Lo,
these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment,
and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends. But as soon as this
thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted
calf. And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was
meet that we should make merry and be glad. For this thy brother was dead, and is alive again,
and was lost, and is found. CHAPTER 16
And he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which had a steward. And the
same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods. And he called him, and said unto him,
How is it that I hear this of thee? Give an account of thy stewardship, or thou mayest be
no longer steward. Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? For my Lord taketh
away from me the stewardship. I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. I am resolved what to do,
that when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. So he called
every one of his Lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my
Lord? And he said, On hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down
quickly, and write fifty. Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said,
And hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write four score.
And the Lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely, for the children
of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light. And I say unto you,
Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. He that is faithful in that which is least,
is faithful also in much. And he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore
ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that
which is your own? No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and
love the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and
mammon. And the Pharisees also who were covetous heard all these things, and they derided him.
And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men, but God knoweth your
hearts. For that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.
The law and the prophets were until John. Since that time the kingdom of God is preached,
and every man presseth into it. And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass,
than one tittle of the law to fail. Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marryeth another,
committeth adultery. And whosoever marryeth her that is put away from her husband,
committeth adultery. There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at
his gate full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
table. Moreover the dogs came, and licked his sores. And it came to pass, that the beggar died,
and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried,
and in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and seeth Abraham afar off and Lazarus
in his bosom. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may
dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivest thy good things,
and likewise Lazarus' evil things. But now he is comforted, and thou are tormented.
And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that they which would pass
from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us that would come from thence. Then he said,
I pray thee therefore, Father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's house, for I have five
brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets, let them hear them. And he said,
Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.
And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.
End of chapter 16, the Gospel according to Saint Luke,
and the authorized version known as the King James Version, chapter 16 and 17.